StatefulSet Support for Updating Volume Claim Template (#1)
huww98/enhancements: keps/sig-storage/4650-stateful-set-update-claim-template/README.md

This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
1. Change API server to allow any updates to `volumeClaimTemplate` of a StatefulSet.

2. Modify StatefulSet controller to add PVC reconciliation logic.

3. Collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.

### Kubernetes API Changes

Changes to StatefulSet `spec`:

1. Introduce a new field in StatefulSet `spec`: `volumeClaimUpdateStrategy` to
   specify how to coordinate the update of PVCs and Pods. Possible values are:
   - `OnDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.
   - `InPlace`: update the PVC in-place if possible. Also includes the `OnDelete` behavior.

2. Introduce a new field in StatefulSet `spec.updateStrategy.rollingUpdate`: `volumeClaimSyncStrategy`
   to specify how to update PVCs and Pods. Possible values are:
   - `Async`: the default value, preseve the current behavior.

>    - `LockStep`: update PVCs first, then update Pods. See below for details.

Reviewer: I don't understand why it's called `LockStep`. I came up with a few names for you to consider. Stepwise, Serial, Ordered, Sync.

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3412#discussion_r1159722463

See here for the context of word lock-step.

Reviewer: okay

Changes to StatefultSet `status`:

Additionally collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.

For each PVC in the template:
- compatible: the number of PVCs that are compatible with the template.
  These replicas will not be blocked on Pod recreation if `volumeClaimSyncStrategy` is `LockStep`.
- updating: the number of PVCs that are being updated in-place.
- overSized: the number of PVCs that are over-sized.
- totalCapacity: the sum of `status.capacity` of all the PVCs.

Some fields in the `status` are also updated to reflect the staus of the PVCs:
- readyReplicas: in addition to pods, also consider the PVCs status. A PVC is not ready if:
  - `volumeClaimUpdateStrategy` is `InPlace` and the PVC is updating;
- availableReplicas: total number of replicas of which both Pod and PVCs are ready for at least `minReadySeconds`
- currentRevision, updateRevision, currentReplicas, updatedReplicas

>   are updated to reflect the status of PVCs.

Reviewer: When expanding the size of pvcs and then kubectl rollout undo, actually pvcs will not be rollbacked, they will stay the expanded size. Right?

Author: It depends. If you enabled feature gate RecoverVolumeExpansionFailure, and the PVC `pvc.Status.AllocatedResources` is lower, then PVC is rolled back, and expansion is cancelled.

This is what I mean by writing "update the PVC in-place to the extent possible". Maybe I should make this more explicit.

     Only proceed to the next ordinal when all the PVCs of the previous ordinal
     are compatible with the new `volumeClaimTemplate`.
   - If `spec.updateStrategy.type` is `OnDelete`,
     Only update the PVC when the Pod is deleted.

### What PVC is compatible

A PVC is compatible with the template if:
- All the immutable fields match exactly; and
- `metadata.labels` and `metadata.annotations` of PVC is a superset of the template; and
- `status.capacity.storage` of PVC is greater than or equal to
  the `spec.resources.requests.storage` of the template; and
- `status.currentVolumeAttributesClassName` of PVC is equal to
  the `spec.volumeAttributesClassName` of the template.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1: Batch Expand Volumes

We're running a CI/CD system and the end-to-end automation is desired.
To expand the volumes managed by a StatefulSet,

> we can just use the same pipeline that we are already using to updating the Pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can just use the same pipeline that we are already using to update the Pod.
```

We can not afford any downtime, so we don't want to delete and recreate the StatefulSet.
Our app can automatically rebuild the data in the new storage from other replicas.
So we update the `volumeClaimTemplate` of the StatefulSet,
delete the PVC and Pod of one replica, let the controller re-create them,
then monitor the rebuild process.
Once the rebuild completes successfully, we proceed to the next replica.

#### Story 3: Migrating Between Different Implementations of the Same Storage Provider

Our storage provider has a new version that provides new features, but can not be upgraded in-place.
We can prepare some new PersistentVolumes using the new version, but referencing the same disk
from the provider as the in-use PVs.
Then the same update process as Story 2 can be used.
Although the PVCs are recreated, the data is preserved, so no rebuild is needed.

#### Story 4: Shinking the PV by Re-creating PVC

After running our app for a while, we optimize the data layout and reduce the required storage size.
Now we want to shrink the PVs to save cost.
The same process as Story 2 can be used.

#### Story 5: Asymmetric Replicas

> The replicas of our StatefulSet are not identical, so we still want to update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The templates for different replicas of a StatefulSet are not identical, so we still want to update
```

Author: I would like the word "template" to specifically refer to the one written in StatefulSet. So I don't like "templates for different replicas". Maybe "The storage requirement of different replicas"?

Reviewer: that's fine.
